---
layout: post
title:  "PalimpAI Week 2"
date:   2026-05-24 15:03:37 -0300
categories: [Research, PalimpAI] 
tags: [segmentation, experiments]
---

# Week 2 - Image Segmentation Overview (1)

## Overview
I spent most of Week 2 experimenting with image segmentation techniques, which are a crucial part of the processing pipeline for this project. 

Additionally, I managed to get a hold of the code used to convert the set of multispectral images into a single RGB image, which will be useful for visualizing the data and eventually for processing it with computer vision techniques.

## Studies

### Topic: Image Segmentation

The goal of image segmentation is to partition an image into multiple segments, which can help in identifying and isolating different objects or regions within the image. This is particularly important for our project, as we want to identify and extract the underlying text from the multispectral images of the palimpsests.

As a friend of mine doing similar work is using superpixel segmentation, I decided to start my studies by understanding how this technique works. Superpixel segmentation groups pixels into perceptually meaningful atomic regions, which can help in reducing the complexity of the image and improving the performance of subsequent processing steps.

While studying and testing some techniques, I grew especially interested in the SLIC (Simple Linear Iterative Clustering) algorithm, which is a popular method for superpixel segmentation. SLIC works by adapting k-means clustering to group pixels based on their color and spatial proximity. I believe that this technique might be particularly useful for our project, as it can help in isolating regions of interest in the multispectral images.

Another reason why SLIC caught my attention is that it seems like its creation marked the start of a new wave of superpixel segmentation techniques, which are more efficient and produce better results than previous methods (e. g., SLICO, SEEDS, LSC, etc).

### Topic: Clustering

While studying image segmentation, I learned that clustering is another important technique in image segmentation, which involves grouping similar data points together. 

I had learned about clustering in previous coursework, but had never tried it in the context of image segmentation. In it, clustering can be used to group pixels based on their color, texture, or other features. But as I came to understand, clustering is not a segmentation technique by itself, but rather a tool that can be used within segmentation algorithms (e. g., SLIC uses a form of clustering to group pixels into superpixels). 

Furthermore, most clustering techniques don't take into account the spatial relationships between pixels, which is crucial for image segmentation. This is why techniques like SLIC are designed to consider both color and spatial proximity when grouping pixels.

### Articles

This week, I managed to read one full article related to image segmentation. The first one was [SLIC: Simple Linear Iterative Clustering](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6126544), which describes the SLIC algorithm in detail and provides experimental results demonstrating its effectiveness.

What I found especially interesting about this article are both the highly detailed explanation of the algorithm and the comparison with other algorithms across many types of criteria.

I also began reading an overview article on image segmentation techniques, which provides a comprehensive review of various methods and their applications. I hope to finish it soon and share my insights in the next post.

## Experiments

### SLIC Superpixel Segmentation

To test the SLIC algorithm, I applied it to some sample images (not from the MISHA dataset, as I still need to process it further). I found the results to be quite promising, as SLIC was able to group pixels into meaningful superpixels that corresponded well with the objects and regions in the images.

I plan on updating the notebook with the SLIC experiments soon, but you can find the code I used to apply SLIC to the sample images at: [SLIC Superpixel Segmentation Experiments](/coming-soon/). My goal is to experiment with object recognition techniques on top of the superpixels, which might help in identifying regions of interest in the multispectral images.

### Clustering for Image Segmentation

To test clustering for image segmentation, I applied k-means clustering to a sample image (once again not from the MISHA dataset). I used the color features of the pixels to group them into clusters. However, as expected, the results were quite limited, as the clustering did not take into account the spatial relationships between pixels, resulting in segments that were not meaningful.

You may find the notebook with the experiments at: [Clustering for Image Segmentation Experiments](/coming-soon/)

## Next Steps

In the next weeks, I'll continue experimenting with image segmentation techniques, as I believe the experiments I conducted this week were a little too basic. The experiments were conducted on sample images rather than on the MISHA dataset, so I still don't know how well these techniques will behave on the data used by the project. So I also plan on applying the SLIC algorithm to the multispectral images from the MISHA dataset, which will be an important step towards developing our processing pipeline.

I'll also continue exploring the MISHA architecture and the code used to convert the multispectral images into RGB images, as understanding these components will be crucial for effectively processing the data and extracting meaningful information from it. So expect a detailed post about the MISHA architecture in the next few weeks.

---

*Research supported by FAPESP.*