---
layout: post
title:  "PalimpAI Week 3"
date:   2026-05-31 15:03:37 -0300
categories: [Research, PalimpAI] 
tags: [pca]
media_subpath: '/assets/img/posts'
---

# Week 3 - Diving into Literature

## Overview

I spent the majority of Week 3 reading articles related to very similar works to our project. 

## Studies

### Articles

#### "Palimpsest Research Based on Hyperspectral Information"

The first article I read, titled ["Palimpsest Research Based on Hyperspectral Information"](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10113438), proposes a methodology for restoring palimpsests based on hyperspectral imaging.

Hyperspectral images are very similar to multispectral ones, but the main difference is that they have more channels (usually a few hundred, while multispectral images have a few dozens). While these additional channels offer more information, some of my other sources argue HSI (Hyperspectral imaging) offers less spatial information, which is often very useful in restoring possible palimpsests.

My biggest takeaway from this article is the processing pipeline. Although roughly explained (in my opinion), all manners of processing the presented have either two or three steps.

The first step is always *Radiometric Calibration*, which appears to cover a magnitude of techniques applied to the hyperspectral data (brightness correction, normalization, etc) before any further processing. The second step is to apply PCA, which we discussed in previous posts. The third and optional step is to apply ICA (Independent Component Analysis), which we have not discussed before.

While I am still studying Radiometric Calibration, I was very surprised that such an apparently simple pipeline wielded such compelling results.

Furthermore, as we'll also see on my notes on the next article, the authors preferred PCA over t-SNE or other dimensionality reduction techniques (which were available at the time). This suggests my theory (refer back to Week 1) that t-SNE would outperform PCA in palimpsest recovery might just be wrong.

#### "Making Light Work: Manuscripts and Multispectral Imaging"

The second article is a literature review over some of the most well-known palimpsests restoration projects using MSI at the time. Despite its focus on highlighting other works, I especially liked Its critical analysis of the methodology of each project.

My takeaways from this article are the (many other projects it pointed me towards) and more confirmation that these big projects also use PCA and ICA in their pipeline.

## Next Steps

Over the next weeks, I plan on testing PCA and t-SNE on our dataset to stress-test my former analysis and to read more on Radiometric Calibration.

In addition, I plan on studying ICA (because it was used on the first article) and doing further reading on the projects covered by the second article, as I hope to find alternative pipelines and techniques to test. 

---

*Research supported by FAPESP.*