---
layout: post
title:  "PalimpAI Week 0"
date:   2026-05-10 12:53:37 -0300
categories: research palimpai
---

## Introduction

This is the first post of the PalimpAI series, where I'll be sharing my journey in my first research project. The goal of this project is to explore how AI and Computer Vision can be used to analyze and understand palimpsests, which are ancient manuscripts that have been reused and overwritten.

To be more specific, I will be working with a dataset of large high-resolution multispectral images of cultural heritage objects, including documents that might be palimpsests. The main goal is to develop a pipeline that can process these images and extract meaningful information from them, such as identifying the underlying text and possibly understanding the materials used in the manuscripts.

As an undergrad research project, this is a great opportunity for me to learn about the intersection of AI and cultural heritage, and to contribute to a field that has the potential to uncover hidden historical information. I'm excited to dive into this project and share my findings along the way!

During this series, I’ll be documenting my progress and sharing updates as the project evolves. While I aim to post weekly, the schedule may vary depending on the pace of the research and university workload.

Since this is an exploratory research project, some plans and ideas may also change over time. I might mention working on one direction in a given week and later decide to pivot to another approach as I learn more about the problem and the data. I think that process of iteration and adjustment is an important part of research, and I hope sharing it openly will make the journey more interesting and informative.

This project is being made possible through the support of FAPESP, whose scholarship is funding this research opportunity.
